[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Hi.
I'm Lisa Garr, host of
"Gaiam Inspirations."
And we are broadcasting
here from Denver, Colorado.
Would you like to find out
how our ancestors lived
50,000 years ago?
Before there were processed
foods and Type 2 diabetes,
what exactly accounted
for their well-being?
Joining me today is researcher
and medical anthropologist Dr.
Alberto Villoldo to talk
about "One Spirit Medicine."
Based on an extreme
health crisis,
Dr. Villoldo discovered that
these ancient shamanic healing
methods that go back to
our paleolithic ancestors
50,000 years ago are
what helped him heal.
Welcome.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>DR. ALBERTO VILLOLDO:
Thank you, Lisa.
Great to be with you.
>>LISA: You too.
You have an enormous
amount of information
that I want to cover
in this next hour.
But I first want to start
off with your journey
and your story.
What was the health crisis
that you experienced?
>>VILLOLDO: I'm a
medical anthropologist
by training, which
means that I spend time
in the jungles in the Amazon, in
Mexico, in Asia, in Indonesia,
and the savannas in Africa.
And everywhere I
went, I picked up
some traveler, unknown
traveler, a bug or a parasite
that accompanied me.
And then 40 years later, a few
years ago, three years ago,
my health collapsed.
I couldn't walk
more than 100 feet
without being totally
out of breath.
And I went in for a
head-to-toe medical check-up.
And the doctors put
me on a world map.
And I had four different
kinds of parasites,
three different kinds to
worm, five different kinds
of hepatitis.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: And they
said, you should be dead.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: Now, I've never had
a diagnosis like that before.
>>LISA: No.
>>VILLOLDO: And it
wasn't that encouraging.
They told me I should
go in for a liver
transplant, that my heart
was riddled with worms,
and I had parasites in my brain.
And Lisa, you know
how hard it is
to find a good brain these days.
>>LISA: OK, so it's not like
you just had the liver to deal
with, the heart and the brain,
and each one of those are
major--
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely major
>>LISA: --repair system.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, I was going
to go on a liver transplant list
and possibly a
heart list as well.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
>>VILLOLDO: So I decided
instead to grow a new body.
And we know how to
grow a new body.
>>LISA: You would have to.
My god.
>>VILLOLDO:
Literally, I made it.
So, we know how to grow a
body because we did once.
We grew a body once.
We grew hearts and livers and
organs and 10 fingers, 10 toes.
>>LISA: Yeah, in utero, though.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
Yeah, but we know how to do it.
And what happens is that
these instructions in our DNA
are now in
password-protected regions.
Because you don't want
to be growing new fingers
throughout your life.
So what you need to do, which
is what the shamans have all
learned to do, which
is how to break
into those password-protected
regions in our DNA
to grow new organs.
And this is what
the energy medicine
of the ancients is
about, is how do we
grow a new body that ages and
heals and dies differently?
And today I have a brand
new liver, brand new heart,
and my old brain back, better
than it's ever been before.
>>LISA: But they were
not transplanted.
These are your original organs.
>>VILLOLDO: These
are new organs.
>>LISA: Explain the difference.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, every
cell in your body's
replaced every
eight to 10 months.
There's no one in
the planet that's
more than seven years old.
So the option that
you have is to grow.
Every seven years you're going
to grow a new body anyway.
You can grow one that's a little
bit older, a little bit more
wrinkled than the last one, or
you can grow a brand new one.
>>LISA: Does this
just have to do
with a mindset, or
chemical physical changes?
>>VILLOLDO: It's biochemical.
It starts with the biochemical,
with the food that you eat.
And this is why we don't
heal as well as we used to,
because of foods we're
eating today are toxic.
They're poisoning us.
And we don't have access
to these regions in our DNA
that can trigger the growth
of new healthy tissue.
>>LISA: OK.
So if we continue to eat
the way that we're eating--
>>VILLOLDO: We're going to die.
It's going to kill us.
And this is the difference
between the paleolithic diet
of our ancestors and our diet
today, which is mostly grains,
which are carbohydrates.
They're turning to sugars
that are killing us.
>>LISA: So, these
grains, though,
are different grains than we
had maybe 50,000 years ago.
Can you explain?
And, I mean, 50 years ago,
but explain what our ancestors
ate 50,000 years ago.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, our
paleolithic ancestors
were primarily
hunters and gatherers,
so they ate fats and proteins.
That was the primary diet.
And we have a minimum
daily requirement of fats
and of proteins.
But carbohydrates, the
minimum daily requirement
of carbohydrate, do
you know what it is?
Zero.
>>LISA: Oh, really?
Not for brain function?
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
Absolutely not.
We do not need any
carbs in our diet.
So carbs are introduced--
well, we did of course
eat carbs 10,000 years ago.
>>LISA: Through
vegetables though, right?
>>VILLOLDO: Through
the vegetables.
But then around 6,000
years ago, at the end
of the last glacial period, you
have the dawn of agriculture.
And with agriculture coming
we begin to eat cabs,
and we begin to eat grains.
And in Europe the grain, the
preferred grain was the wheat,
and they're people of the wheat.
In America were
people of the corn.
In Asia, they're
people of the rice.
And at the same time, you
have the rise of religion
and the rise of warfare.
And you find this embedded
in religion, the relationship
to the grains.
For example, the
Lord's Prayer that we
learned when we were children
says, and give us this day
our daily fats and
proteins, right?
>>LISA: Give us this
day our daily bread.
>>VILLOLDO: Our daily bread.
So then religions are tied
to grains and to agriculture
and to warfare.
So many wars are
waged in the name
of whose god is the real god
or the more powerful god.
>>LISA: What does that
have to do with rice?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
because the carbs,
the grains turn into
sugars, and they
feed a part of the brain that is
very ancient, that is violent,
angry, and predatory.
>>LISA: Really?
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
It's the limbic brain that
lives in fight or flight
or paralysis.
>>LISA: The carbs
feed the limbic brain.
>>VILLOLDO: The carbs
The fats and the proteins
feed the higher brain.
The fats do, particularly the
kind of fats known as ketones.
And they feed the
higher brain, which
is the brain that is able to
see our interconnectedness
with all things and that is able
to create psychosomatic health.
>>LISA: Oh, so to transform
your health from your brain.
>>VILLOLDO: Totally.
>>LISA: Let me go
back to the carbs
and the anger for a
second, because that's
an interesting topic.
So, eating carbs could cause you
to have more fits of rage, more
angry temper?
>>VILLOLDO: The brain that feeds
on carbs is the limbic brain,
and it has four
fundamental programs, which
are known as the four Fs, which
are fear, feeding, fighting,
and sex.
The sugar--
[LAUGHTER]
--fornication.
>>LISA: Got it.
>>VILLOLDO: Feed this old brain,
which needs to have enemies.
It thrives on being
self righteous.
It has very poor self esteem.
It lives in scarcity, and it's
not able to live in intimacy.
And it's the brain of fear, the
brain of fear and of violence.
And it feeds on
sugars, on carbs.
>>LISA: You've
described what most
of the personal development
industry is addressing.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
Now, these programs are encoded
in the form of emotions,
because emotions are
a very, very good way
to remember things.
So what the shamans say, the
old medicine people, they say,
you cannot ever
heal you emotions.
You have to get rid
of your emotions.
Your emotions are residues
of ancient survival programs
that are dated.
And you have to replace
them with feelings.
>>LISA: I remember
reading this in your book.
>>VILLOLDO: So
feelings are authentic.
Emotions are ancient
survival programs.
And the way to know the
difference between them
is that, see, the brain resets
itself every 20 minutes,
the brain and nervous system.
And if anything lasts
longer than 20 minutes,
it's not a feeling.
It's an emotion.
Feelings of love, of caring,
but they wash through you.
>>LISA: But emotions stay?
>>VILLOLDO: Emotions linger.
>>LISA: Those memories.
>>VILLOLDO: And they're
always attached to memories,
and they predispose us to
create the same situations again
in the hopes of healing the
original-- you know when
the ex calls and you
look at the caller ID
and you go, what the
hell does he want?
>>LISA: Yeah, you're not-- yeah.
>>VILLOLDO: That's an emotion.
A feeling is, hi.
How are you doing?
I hope you're
having a great day.
How can I help you?
>>LISA: I know the
difference, yes.
>>VILLOLDO: And there's no
way to heal the emotions.
You can only get rid of them.
>>LISA: Get rid of them.
So how do you do that?
>>VILLOLDO: And you replay.
You start with the diet.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: You
keep eating grains,
you're going to be
stuck in anger and fear.
You have that great, delicious
muffin in the morning,
and then you go
to your therapist
to work on your
self-esteem issues,
you're not going
to get anywhere.
You're going to stay stuck
in the same old head,
intellectual deciphering,
dissecting of your past.
Whereas you shift
the diet, but then
you have to shift the
luminous energy field.
>>LISA: Yes.
We're going to talk
about that in a second.
>>VILLOLDO: Which
is the blueprint.
>>LISA: OK.
That's definitely
important, but I
want to go back to the
grams for a second.
So it's not a matter
of people being
allergic to the genetically
modified organism in the grain.
It's a matter of it
feeding, as a grain,
genetically modified
or not, feeding
the limbic system of the brain,
thus causing the emotions
to take over the body.
>>VILLOLDO: That's
one of the problems.
The other is that most of
us, 98% of the population
is gluten sensitive.
So when you're gluten sensitive,
you end up with a leaky gut,
and you have particles
of gluten and food
going into the bloodstream.
And the immune system mounts
a huge response against it,
because it says, hey, this
food particle, that's foreign.
And then you have inflammation.
>>LISA: So the leaky gut
part-- and we have so much
to talk about-- but the leaky
gut, the glue, the gluten
basically sticks to
the side of the walls.
I learned this from
watching one of the videos
we're going to watch
in a second of yours.
And how does that
cause a leaky gut?
Explain that barrier.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, the way
the leaky gut is caused
is by a protein called zonulin.
And zonulin is these
unrecognized by the body.
It's a new protein that's only
developed since agriculture.
And our DNA doesn't
recognize it,
so it tends to wedge itself in
the tight junctions in the gut.
Remember, what the
job of the gut is
is to take what is not
you, which is food,
and turn it into you.
>>LISA: Which is energy.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
And this is done by the
microbes in your gut.
But zonulin wedges itself
between the tight junction
and creates openings, and you're
able to have food particles
and microbes from your own flora
are going into the bloodstream,
and it creates a huge
immune response, which
results in inflammation
and results
in your brain getting
inflamed, on fire.
Your heart, your organs,
you get puffed up.
>>LISA: Your immune
system starts to--
>>VILLOLDO: Your immune system--
>>LISA: --attack itself.
>>VILLOLDO: And then you
develop a dozen food allergies.
And this is caused by gluten.
>>LISA: And that can manifest
in what people see today
in modern-day diseases such
as Type 2, diabetes Type 1
diabetes, thyroid issues.
>>VILLOLDO: You have
100 different diseases.
See, we have over
14,000 diseases
in the medical
encyclopedia, 14,000 forms
of diagnosing somebody sick.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: For the shaman,
there's only one disease.
>>LISA: What is that?
>>VILLOLDO: And
that's disconnection
from nature and from spirit.
And there's only
one remedy, which
is a one spirit medicine,
which is you're reconnecting
with yourself, with your
environment, with your gut,
with the bacteria in your gut.
>>LISA: Let's take a look
at this video on "One Spirit
Medicine" and then we'll
talk a little bit deeper
about the topic.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-Here is an
incredible individual
who has been able to bridge the
seemingly very disparate worlds
of shamanic
spiritual experiences
and mainstream moderm
leading-edge neuroscience.
-Hi.
My name is Alberto
Villoldo, and I'd
like to tell you about
one spirit medicine.
In order for us
to heal ourselves,
we need to step beyond the
Western paradigm of disease.
In the ancient
shamanic traditions,
there was only one ailment,
which was our disconnection
from spirit, and
only one treatment,
which was one spirit medicine.
One spirit medicine is
founded on three principles.
The first one is that we
have to repair our brain.
When we repair our brain, we're
able to heal our emotions.
We cannot heal our emotions
by talking about them.
In fact, the only way
to heal our emotions
is to get rid of our
emotions, because emotions
are ancient survival
programs programmed
into a predatory and
primitive region in the brain.
A brain that lives on
scarcity, a brain that
lives on fear, a
brain that projects
its own turmoil onto others.
Through one spirit
medicine, you'll
learn how you can get rid
of all of your emotions
and replace them with feelings.
Feelings are authentic.
They don't last.
Emotions linger.
Emotions keep us angry
with someone for 20 minutes
or 20 days or 20 years.
When we repair the brain, we
heal ourselves of our emotions.
And this book will tell you how
you can do that in six weeks.
The second step is that we
need to repair our guts.
The human body is a colony.
90% of our DNA belongs to
microbes that are not even us,
600 different varieties of
microbes that inhabit our gut
and our skin and our mouth.
And our microbe colonies
are out of balance.
In fact, so much so
that we can no longer
trust our gut instinct anymore,
because our gut has gone bad.
In one spirit
medicine, we teach you
how you can repair your
gut through probiotics,
through specialty
probiotics that
bring balance to the colony.
Because when your gut is
out, your instinct is gone.
You start gravitating
towards the wrong people,
the wrong relationships,
and the wrong decisions
and miss the great
opportunities in life.
When we re-establish
our gut, what happens
is that our allergies disappear.
Our brain fog clears.
We're able to sleep and to rest.
And then our body's able to
establish balance once again.
The third cornerstone
of one spirit medicine
is that we must experience
states of communion
with all of life, what
has been described
in the ancient literature
as states of enlightenment
and that are available to
us once we repair our brain.
In these states of communion,
we understand the oneness
of spirit, and we
are able to download
from the great hard
drive of the universe
the techniques for dreaming
a new world into being,
for dreaming our
health into being,
relationships into being,
for working actively
with our abilities
to create the world with
beauty and with health
and with generosity and
to create really the world
that we want our children's
children to inherit.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: All right, so
that covered three ways
to heal the brain.
But first I want to go back
to the conversation about fats
and proteins.
Because we did talk about the
carbs and the limbic system.
The fats and the proteins,
and what about vegetables?
And what part of the
brain do they feed?
>>VILLOLDO:
Vegetables, are carbs,
but they're complex carbs.
They don't turn into
sugars very readily.
>>LISA: What category do
they fall into though?
>>VILLOLDO: They fall
into the carbs category.
But remember that we
co-evolved with the plants,
not with the animals.
The vegetables are nutrient
dense and calorie poor.
And this is the key to
your health, nutrient dense
and calorie, sugar poor foods.
And this is all the veggies.
But they contain
the instructions
for switching on the
genes that create health
and switching off the
genes that create disease.
When you eat your
veggies or you drink
green juice in the
morning, you're
switching on more than 500
genes that create health.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>VILLOLDO: And this is the
principle of energy medicine,
is you create the conditions for
health and disease goes away.
>>LISA: Side note--
>>VILLOLDO: You
don't treat disease.
>>LISA: Does it
matter if it's juiced,
or does it have to
be cold pressed?
Just a real quick
side note there.
>>VILLOLDO: Ideally it's juiced.
Ideally it's juiced, and
you don't want the fiber.
You can eat your
fiber somewhere else.
You want the instructions.
These are genetic switches.
This is epigenetics.
So you're instructing
your genes to switch
on the conditions
that produce health
and switch off the genes
that produce pathology.
>>LISA: And you said you
don't treat the disease.
You treat the--
>>VILLOLDO: Well, this is
the basis of shamanic healing
is that you create the physical,
the dietary, the energetic,
the spiritual
conditions for health.
And disease goes away.
Create the conditions for
health, disease goes away.
So you don't treat disease.
That's the obsession
that we have in the West.
That makes disease real.
>>LISA: You great health.
>>VILLOLDO: You treat health.
Create health,
disease goes away.
>>LISA: So now, the
proteins, the vegetables--
I'm throwing that in
there-- and the fats,
feed what part of the brain?
>>VILLOLDO: Let's start with
the first fats than we ever had.
Breast milk is 40% DHA,
omega 3 fatty acids.
And they're called
essential fatty acids
because we can't get
them in our food.
So, we used to get it from fish.
But today's fish
are all farm raised,
so they contain
minimal omega 3s.
And the reason mother's
milk is so rich
in omega 3s is because
it repairs the brain.
The DHA and the omega
3s repair the brain.
So if you don't have a
friend who's lactating,
you need to supplement.
>>LISA: Why does the brain
need repairing at birth?
>>VILLOLDO: It needs growing.
>>LISA: It needs growing.
OK.
Got it.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh,
it needs growing.
And then later the pesticides
and the stress hormones,
the adrenaline and
the cortisol, they
damage a region in the brain
known as the hippocampus, which
is where learning happens.
So you cannot learn how to
have a better relationship,
or how to feel better
about yourself,
or how to create health if this
region in the brain is damaged.
And this is repaired by DHA.
DHA repairs this in six weeks.
>>LISA: Wow.
How do you get DHA as an
adult through foods that are,
many of them are in
contaminated by--
>>VILLOLDO: Well, you need to
supplement with the omega 3s.
DHA is one of the
omega 3 fatty acids.
So you need to take
your fish oils.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: And again, you
cannot get it from the fish you
eat anymore because they're
raised on corn, on grain.
So when you eat fish
that's farm raised,
you're eating
grains second hand.
>>LISA: So you can't get
vegetarian oils, right?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, you
can get it from seaweed.
You can get DHA from seaweed.
That's the one that I take.
>>LISA: Seaweed.
Do you put that
in a green juice?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
You actually get
the oil extract,
and you take it as a supplement.
And you need to take
3 to 5 grams a day
to repair the hippocampus.
And today we all
have a broken brain.
Our brains are broken.
>>LISA: I just
recently have been
researching the phytoplankton
oils that you're talking about.
Is this what you take?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, I take
the seaweed extract,
the seaweed oils.
This is where fish make it from.
They eat seaweed.
And then they turn
that into omega 3s.
So you can get it
directly from the seaweed.
>>LISA: So you
went to the source,
the veins of the ocean,
basically is the seaweed.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: So that's what
you think is contributing
to the best possible use of
supplements for the brain.
>>VILLOLDO: The omega 3s,
regardless of how you get it.
Fish oils, for those of you
who are not vegetarians,
get the cod liver oil.
Get the omega 3 capsules, 3 to
5 grams a day within six weeks
repairs the hippocampus.
And you can learn
how to create health.
>>LISA: Great.
OK, so we've covered the fats.
Now what about other
types of supplements
that are great for the brain?
>>VILLOLDO: The brain loves
the fats, and particularly
coconut oil, olive oil, almonds,
avocados, all the natural fats.
It loves it.
In fact, coconut oil is a
medium chain triglyceride.
Means that it goes directly
to your mitochondria,
to the fuel factories
in your brain cells.
And the brain loves it.
>>LISA: Can you take a medium
chain triglyceride by itself?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, absolutely.
>>LISA: OK, so just
the oil itself.
>>VILLOLDO: A scoop of coconut
oil, I put it in my coffee
in the morning.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: And it's delicious.
>>LISA: Great new trend.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: And whipping it up,
you can make a latte with it,
but it feeds the brain.
>>VILLOLDO: It feeds
the brain food.
Chocolate is brain food.
>>LISA: Really?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
But you got to be
careful with the sugar.
You want to get the 70
to 80% dark chocolate.
>>LISA: It has medium
chain triglycerides in it?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, absolutely.
>>LISA: Really?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: What about
the propensity
to gain weight from
eating too much?
How much would cause
you to gain weight?
How much is too much?
>>VILLOLDO: Fats
don't make you fat.
>>LISA: They won't,
no matter what.
>>VILLOLDO: They will
not make you fat.
Doesn't matter how.
Look at people that
live in the Arctic.
All they live on is
whale fat and blubber.
Fats don't make you fat.
Carbs make you fat.
Carbs turn into sugar.
Sugars are stored as fat.
>>LISA: So if you're
having a carb craving,
the best thing to do would be
to switch to something that has
a medium chain triglyceride.
>>VILLOLDO: No.
If you're having a carb craving,
like you want that chocolate
chip cookie really, really bad,
it's not you who wants it--
>>LISA: Or the chips,
the corn chips.
>>VILLOLDO: It's basically,
it's your gut flora.
The microbes in your
flora, they are 90%
of who we are, 90% of our DNA.
They outnumber us 10 to 1.
They are the ones who
want the chocolate chip
cookie, because you've got
the wrong kind of microbes
that are addicted to sugar.
So if you cannot change your
food cravings unless you change
your flora, your probiotics, and
that's where you have to begin.
You have to begin
with the colony,
because we're a colony organism.
>>LISA: So we'll begin
with eliminating grains,
then go to the
fats for the brain.
Now let's talk about the gut.
Let's talk more about this.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: What's the difference
between a probiotic
and a prebiotic?
Is there one?
>>VILLOLDO: Probiotics
are living creatures,
and we have over
600 species of flora
of microbes, good microbes.
And microbes, we have a
symbiotic relationship with,
not parasitic.
Those we get sick
from, symbiotic.
And humans are
colony organisms so
that we have hijacked the DNA
of the 600 species of microbes
to put them to work for us.
They produce
vitamins, nutrients.
Humans, we only have 25,
26,000 genes in our DNA.
A grain of rice has
80,000, much more complex
than humans are because we
rely on the colony to produce
vitamin C, to digest foods.
The only thing we
contribute to digestion
is peristalsis, little bit of
movement and stomach acids.
The bugs do the
rest of the work.
>>LISA: So eating
rice could disrupt
that naturally
digestive process,
according to what you
were just talking about?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
Eating rice is going to be
great if it's good, whole grain
brown rice.
It's not going to disrupt
the process, because an earth
worm has 60,000 genes.
We only have 25,000.
Nature's experimenting
with humans as a colony,
not as a single
stand-alone organism.
And 90% of the colony is not us.
So if you ever wake
up in the morning
and you're not quite
feeling yourself,
it's because you're not.
Because 90% of you is not you.
>>LISA: It's Been
taken over by--
>>VILLOLDO: It's been colonized
by these helpful organisms.
And the minute you
take an antibiotic,
you're destroying the colony.
Even one dose of
antibiotic can throw off
your colony for the
rest of your life
so that you get food allergies.
You get sensitivities
to pollen, to the things
that you could
eliminate if you were
to re-settle the colony with
the right microorganisms.
>>LISA: So you did this.
You basically had parasites
and worms and all sorts of--
>>VILLOLDO: That's
where I started.
>>LISA: So you started
with re-colonizing
your liver, your gut.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, totally.
>>LISA: How did you do that?
>>VILLOLDO: I did
that with probiotics.
>>LISA: What kind?
>>VILLOLDO: Probiotics
are basically
the good bugs that we have.
Prebiotics are the things
that the probiotics eat.
So that's what feeds them.
But remember, when
you eat food, they're
the ones that eat first.
They eat first, and then they
give you the metabolized food.
They turn what's
not you into you.
>>LISA: And are these the higher
stomach or the lower stomach?
>>VILLOLDO: They're
actually in the GI tract.
>>LISA: In the GI tract.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah,
after the stomach.
>>LISA: OK, so after you've
broken down the food then
they--
>>VILLOLDO: After
you, your stomach
turns around with
digestive acids,
then they get to work on it.
And they take all the
nutrients out of the food
so that they can be absorbed
through your GI tract
and through your bloodstream.
But when you have a mood
disorder, for example,
and you have the wrong
flora, the wrong microbes,
you're reacting to their poop,
to their waste product that's
toxic to the brain.
And then you're trying
to medicate the brain
without changing the gut.
>>LISA: Fascinating.
So, I'm tracking
here, the oils first
and then a good probiotic.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: That is now, there's a
million out there on the market
these days.
A lot of them are
based in dairy.
>>VILLOLDO: Can I
recommend a brand?
>>LISA: Sure.
>>VILLOLDO: OK, the
best brand in the market
is called Ascended Health.
Ascended Health, and you can
get them at ascendedhealth.com.
>>LISA: What makes it the best?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
they're harvested
from the blue zones around the
planet, the longevity zones.
And they're living probiotics.
Most of the ones we get
in the market are dead.
>>LISA: Right, even
though they say a billion.
>>VILLOLDO: Billions
and billions.
This is like sending in
the Navy Seals instead
of 100 billion dead.
And they're extraordinary.
They're so potent you
can only take five drops.
And in a month, they can
re-settle the colony.
>>LISA: And you can do
this after antibiotics.
>>VILLOLDO: This is
essential you do it after.
But this is what the shamans do
to be able to repair the gut,
to repair the brain,
to reach the higher
states of consciousness
where they can create
psychosomatic
health, and then they
can train the world into be.
>>LISA: So let's take
it from the micro
to the macro conversation here,
because I appreciate that.
We've talked about
how the details,
but do the shamans
take the probiotics,
or do they really just heal?
>>VILLOLDO: Oh,
take the probiotics.
>>LISA: They do.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
They buy them through Amazon.
They're for the Amazon, right?
>>LISA: That's perfect.
>>VILLOLDO: But you know
where the probiotics
come from originally?
If you have an
organic garden, you
don't need to take probiotics.
>>LISA: Because you're--
>>VILLOLDO: Because
they're in your food.
When you pull out a carrot,
it's full of probiotics.
>>LISA: Just eat it raw.
Eating it raw--
>>VILLOLDO: You're reading in
raw right out of the garden.
You're eating a tremendous
amount of probiotics.
So you don't need to order it
from your local health food
store.
>>LISA: And gardens these
days, you can do so many things
with gardens.
You can create gardens
in a box and stack them.
>>VILLOLDO: It's incredible.
Be sure that you get
clean fertilizer,
because otherwise
you're taking toxins in.
But that's where you
get your probiotics.
In fact, that's how we
used to stay healthy.
When I was a kid, we used to
have this incredible health
maintenance thing
called a garden, called
the backyard actually.
And we used to put
things in our mouth
and put dirt in our mouths.
But today, we want our
children to be sterile.
And we have them, and
we have sterile guts
that are the cost of so
many of our food allergies.
>>LISA: And the immune system
doesn't have a chance to work
on--
>>VILLOLDO: It does not.
>>LISA: --building itself.
But it's an interesting
world, though,
because hand sanitizers
and all the things
that we do, because
these superbugs out there
are so strong.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh yeah.
>>LISA: But yet
at the same time,
we haven't empowered our immune
system yet to fight them.
But with that said, that would
have taken years to do, right?
We have weaker immune
systems now, don't we?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah, we do.
But we can strengthen them.
But, you know, 80% of our
immune system is in our gut.
>>LISA: Yes.
OK.
>>VILLOLDO: So if you
can strengthen the gut,
you're actually strengthening
the immune system.
And what we're going
to talk about later
is how you can upgrade the
quality of the information
in your field so that you can
upgrade your immune system
by downloading the
codes directly instead
of by having to get sick
to train the immune system.
>>LISA: OK, so this has to do
with the luminous body, yes.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: OK.
I'm going to have you take a
look at a video first talking
about the luminous body.
[VIDEO PLAYBACK]
-The Luminous Body,
the way of the shaman,
by Dr. Alberto Villoldo.
In this fascinating
and informative DVD,
Dr. Alberto Villoldo
introduces viewers
to the luminous energy field
that surounds and informs
our physical body like
a blueprint of life.
-This luminous
energy field is what
contains the imprints of
our early life experiences,
of genetically
inherited illnesses,
even of memories before we
were born, when we were still
in the uterus and before.
When we learn to perceive
the luminous energy field,
we learn to perceive the
luminous nature of life.
The visual spectrum,
what the eye can see,
is a very narrow band of the
electromagnetic spectrum,
very, very small.
Most of what's happening
in the universe
is happening outside
of the visual spectrum.
When we learn to perceive
with our inner eyes,
with the eyes that can perceive
the luminous nature of life,
we recognize our
interconnectedness
with all things, with the
stars, with the rivers,
with the mountains, with the
valleys, with each other.
-Unveiling the secret of
ancient shaman healers,
he teaches us that many of
our physical and psychological
problems stem from imprints
within our luminous body.
Dr. Villoldo reveals the
nature of this luminous field,
how it acts as a blueprint
for our physical body,
and how by
understanding its nature
we can actually heal
ourselves and each other.
Once the luminous body is
clear, Dr. Villoldo explains,
physical and emotional
healing can begin.
Trained as a medical
anthropologist,
Dr. Villoldo left the academic
world behind 20 years ago
to study among the
ancient shamans.
It was in the Andes
Mountains of South America
that he discovered the
wisdom of the luminous body
from the indiginous shamans.
This ancient knowledge
reveals the secret
of true health and happiness.
To aid Dr. Villoldo in
explaining the luminous energy
field, the paintings of
visionary artist Alex Grey
are presented.
No other artist has
depicted the luminous energy
form in all of its intricacies
as clearly as Alex Grey.
Dr. Villoldo's
presentation, together
with Alex Grey's
images, helps all of us
to understand the nature of
our spiritual and physical
well-being.
-And today, we're training
people from all cuts of life
to learn to heal themselves,
to learn to heal each other,
and to learn to heal the world.
And this is who the shaman is.
We are caretakers of the earth.
And my mission is to
train Western shamans that
can dream a dream of
healing and of peace.
-Many of our illnesses, the
psychological disorders,
addictions, and
failed relationships
can be traced to faulty
imprints in our luminous body.
In this DVD, Dr. Villoldo
unvels how to heal and recover
from these destructive
imprints and how
to regain our physical, mental,
and spiritual well-being.
[END PLAYBACK]
>>LISA: OK, so we just watched
a video on the luminous body
and on our outside of our body.
But what's the connection
between what we eminate
and what goes on
inside our brains?
Explain that.
>>VILLOLDO: Well, the
luminous energy field
is a blueprint that
organizes the body
the same way that a
magnet organizes iron
filings on a piece of glass.
So it's a matrix.
Now, the interface between
the luminous energy
field and the physical body is
the brain and nervous system.
This is the command center.
If your brain is
damaged, if it's broken,
let me give you a
frightening statistic.
If you live to be 85
years old in America,
you have a 50% chance of
having diagnosable Alzheimer's.
>>LISA: Which you'll
detect way before that.
>>VILLOLDO: Which
already the deterioration
will begin way before.
50%.
Now, in the year 1900,
Alzheimer's was not even known.
It hadn't been discovered yet.
In today, one in two Americans
will get some form of cancer.
In the year 1900, less than
3% of Americans got cancer.
>>LISA: One in two
Americans will get cancer.
>>VILLOLDO: One
in two Americans.
>>LISA: 50% of Americans
will get cancer.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: What does
that contribute to?
>>VILLOLDO: 120 years
ago less than 3%,
so we're having a health
crisis that's extraordinary.
And it's due to many,
many-- it's hard to say,
this is the source.
But the fact that we cannot
create psychosomatic health,
the levels of stress toxins.
In 1900, everything you ate
was free range and organic.
So all of these things
make a difference.
So today we need to be able
to rely on the brain's ability
to create health, to create
psychosomatic health.
>>LISA: You mentioned
that several times.
What is psychosomatic health.
>>VILLOLDO: Psychosomatic
health is how you can envision,
you can dream your
health into being
through use of your intention.
But to do that, you have
to access the higher brain.
So just to wrap up the brain,
no sugars, no dairy, no gluten.
Fats and proteins is what
you want to feed it on.
And eliminate grains
from your diet.
And within a month, you can
actually grow a new brain.
You can renew your neurons.
And the process that
does this is a substance
called BDNF-- Brain-Derived
Neurotropic Factors.
Because when you and
I went to college,
we thought that every
shot of tequila we
had meant that we
wiped out 20,000--
>>LISA: Brain cells.
>>VILLOLDO: --neurons.
Today we've discovered that
the brain produces stem cells
and that you can
actually trigger
the production of stem cells in
the brain to grow new neurons.
This is how I grew a new brain.
>>LISA: This is the
news of the century.
So, you don't have to
take the stem cells.
So many questions.
Wait, let's go back, coffee.
You didn't add coffee.
What about coffee and alcohol?
Talk to me about those two.
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
alcohol, forget it.
Coffee is actually an
amazing detoxifier.
But your fight or flight
system has to be tranquil.
If it's not, it'll
just hype you up.
And the way you can
tell the difference
is if you get jittery
and hyped up with coffee,
you need to first go back and
reset the fight or flight.
But the beauty of it is that
it's a great detoxifier.
It's one of the top detoxifiers.
But you need to use it
wisely with no sugar.
>>LISA: And no cream.
>>VILLOLDO: And no cream.
>>LISA: Of course
because of the dairy.
But what about if you eat
protein along with coffee.
Would it neutralize it?
>>VILLOLDO: No.
>>LISA: No?
Coffee doesn't neutralize.
>>LISA: But it detoxifies.
>>VILLOLDO: What coffee
does is that it triggers
a detox pathway called
the Nrf2 detox pathway,
Nrf2, which gets cells,
the inside of the cells,
to release toxins.
Most of the detoxification
programs we do
are cleaning out the filters,
the liver or the kidneys.
But you want to get the
junk that's inside the cell.
You want to get that out.
And coffee, and broccoli
seeds, curcumin,
curry are wonderful detoxifiers
of the inside of the cell.
And when you get the junk
out, then your mitochondria
can begin to recover
their health.
>>LISA: I was just
talking with someone
who does the green coffee
enemas as a way of detoxifying
the liver.
Have you heard of this?
>>VILLOLDO: Yes.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>VILLOLDO: But the liver
is one of the filters.
And you need to do
that first, but you
want to detoxify brain cells.
Because no matter how many
times you clear your liver,
the brain fog is not
going to go away.
>>LISA: Interesting.
>>VILLOLDO: It's important
that you clean the liver.
But the detoxifiers that do
that, we know what they are.
Coffee is one of them.
Curcumin is another one.
>>LISA: Eat some broccoli--
>>VILLOLDO: Broccoli
seeds, extraordinary.
Sulforaphane is the
active ingredient,
and it'll trigger
cellular detox.
When you detox the
inside of the cell,
your mitochondria, the fuel
factories, begin to repair.
The mitochondria
don't belong to us.
They are actually microbes that
integrated into our own cells.
And they are responsible
for producing energy,
but they also set
the death clock.
They are charged with the
death clock inside cells.
They tell cells when
they need to die.
Now, when they're not
functioning properly,
you have cells that believe
that they can live forever.
And what do we call those cells?
Cancer.
Cancers are cells that don't
know that they need to die.
When you reset the
mitochondrial death clock,
new set of instruction goes out.
And you don't have cells
that die too quickly, which
makes you age too rapidly.
So you want to clean out
the inside of the cell
to be able to restore
mitochondria to have
your energy be at its prime.
And over 200
illnesses, including
cancer, cardiovascular
disease, dementia,
Alzheimer's, are related to
mitochondrial dysfunction
because of toxins
inside the cell.
>>LISA: OK, so
clearing the toxins.
Now, once you clear the
liver, which the blood
filters through the liver,
what, once every four
minutes or something like that?
Aren't you cleansing
the blood in the cells
by cleansing the liver?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, you're
cleansing the blood.
Blood is a transport system.
So you're cleansing
the river, but you've
got to get the
factory way upstream
to stop polluting the river.
And that's--
>>LISA: Oh, so it'll
continue to-- OK.
Because I was thinking,
if you cleanse the blood,
it'll just cleanse the brain.
But no.
>>VILLOLDO: No.
The blood will not
get inside the cell.
See, the cell doesn't
have any blood in it.
The cell is like
a little sphere,
and it releases its waste
into the bloodstream.
And it takes nutrients
from the blood.
So when the waste builds up
too much inside the cell,
it damages your mitochondria.
>>LISA: These are certain
cells, because there's also
blood cells, right?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, there are many
kinds of cells in your body.
You have brain cells.
You have blood cells.
You have bone cells.
You have muscle cells.
>>LISA: So we're talking
about specifically--
>>VILLOLDO: But we want to
specifically detoxify the brain
so you can dream your world
into being and your health
into being.
>>LISA: Got it.
So you want to go
after the brain cells.
>>VILLOLDO: Neurons.
>>LISA: OK.
Now, you talked about
the psychosomatic health.
Is cleansing the brain
cell more effectively done
through the health
measures you're talking
about or through your thoughts?
Which is more powerful?
>>VILLOLDO: You have to do both.
You have to first get the
junk out of the cells,
and you've got to get the
junk out of your mind.
So you can't get the
junk out of your mind
unless you get the junk
out of the cells first.
So if you're thinking, I
should have paid that bill.
I've got to respond
to these emails,
I'm so upset with my-- you
can't get that garbage out
unless you get the
physical garbage out first.
>>LISA: OK.
And how much does exercise
contribute to detoxifying brain
cells?
>>VILLOLDO: Exercise
is fabulous.
You need to exercise.
It contributes.
But what the shamans
have all discovered
were the plants that helped
you to detoxify the brain
and trigger the production of
new neurons, neural stem cells,
so you could grow a new brain.
And then they learned how
to switch the brain on
to be able to download
the codes for a new human
from the luminous energy field.
>>LISA: Wow.
That's a whole nother topic.
Let's go into that.
Downloading the
codes of a new human
to the luminous energy
field, what does that mean?
>>VILLOLDO: OK, so, we have DNA.
We know what DNA is.
And then we have the
luminous energy field.
DNA is a hardware.
And the luminous energy
field is a software.
>>LISA: OK.
>>VILLOLDO: So, the problem
is that we're upgrading
the software all the time.
It's happening.
Nature's informing us.
The field is connected
to everything.
To everything in the cosmos, so
it gets upgraded all the time.
But what translates
that upgrade is
the brain and nervous system,
and then the DNA gets it,
gets new instructions, because
DNA only manufactures proteins.
That's the only thing DNA does.
And we're a
protein-based life form.
This is protein.
So when you upgrade the field
to version 7.1 of the software,
you've got to be able to
transmit that to the DNA
so that you can not
just heal and repair
but literally grow a new body,
grow a new liver, a new heart,
a new brain.
>>LISA: And that's the hardware.
>>VILLOLDO: And that's
what the hardware can do.
>>LISA: But you
update the hardware
by updating the software.
So you update the physical body
by updating the luminous field.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
Luminous field is updated
automatically all the time.
You know how your computer
gets automatic updates
on the software?
The luminous energy field,
because it's a field,
it extends to infinity.
>>LISA: But it can be
updated with malware.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
That's was sorcerers do.
Sorcerers will
insert some malware,
will insert bad
instructions into your field
and trigger the expression of
a gene that creates cancer.
And they'll harm, they'll
kill someone that way.
>>LISA: Seriously.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh yeah.
I saw this when I was an
anthropologist in Haiti,
for example.
Voodoo works that way.
They're not going to go
punch you in the face.
They're going to
tweak your energy
field to express a gene that
will create a breast condition.
>>LISA: Oh my god.
You've seen this.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh yeah.
We've seen this also,
but we call it stress.
>>LISA: Very well said, yes.
So, does that take a certain
level of skill to do?
And I'm asking this question
because you can also
do the same thing the
opposite way, where
you can insert a program through
the luminous energy field--
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely.
>>LISA: --that could
reverse a cancer
and that could cause health.
>>VILLOLDO: But that's what
teach our students how to do.
What I do today is to train
modern shamans in the practice
of energy medicine.
And energy medicine has
to do with upgrading
the quality of the
information in the field
to create the conditions
for health energetically
so the body can
eliminate disease.
And we train practitioners in a
very ancient modality of energy
medicine that is actually
very modern, because physics
has finally explained it.
>>LISA: Oh.
Explain that.
Yeah, so, I'm still a little
bit stuck on the voodoo magic,
and I want to talk
about that for a second.
Because that is an
ancient art that's
been around for a long time.
And did those shamans have
to train in a certain form
in order to have that?
>>VILLOLDO: You know, when you
have-- voodoo's actually also
a very elevated form of
healing, but it has--
the practitioners go both ways.
>>LISA: It has the
darkness to it.
>>VILLOLDO: It has a dark
side and a light side.
But life has a dark
There's so much black magic
being practiced in corporations
today.
>>LISA: I was just
going to bring that up.
>>VILLOLDO: Sabotaging each
other, undermining each other.
>>LISA: Undermining our planet.
>>VILLOLDO:
Undermining the planet.
Anytime you send anger
or rage at someone,
it's like sending
a psychic dark.
It's like doing black magic.
You're hurting someone.
And when you send
love to someone,
it's a beautiful blessing.
But that's information
that goes into the field.
>>LISA: Well, it's
interesting because you
talk about social movements
towards cleaning up
our environment and
so forth and some
of the injustices in the
world that are being done.
Why wouldn't those
shamans take out
people that are human
trafficking and that
are throwing massive
loads of toxic waste
into our environment?
>>VILLOLDO: You can not
actually heal somebody
without their consent.
>>LISA: OK.
But you can harm somebody
without their consent.
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
when you practice
with a certain level of ethics,
you can not work on anyone
without their consent.
And we can heal or harm
someone without their consent,
but what happens is that
you take on their karma.
So it's a very
high price you pay.
So you don't want
to be fixing people
without getting their approval.
>>LISA: Interesting I say
the whole thing consciously
because those types of shamans
that are trained enough
to do something like
that have to understand
the karmic ramifications.
>>VILLOLDO: Oh yeah.
The first thing we
teach our students
is the ethics and
the intentionality.
Intentionality without
ethics can get you
into a lot of trouble.
>>LISA: For lifetimes.
>>VILLOLDO: Absolutely, yeah.
>>LISA: So let's talk
about now the healing
aspects of modern shamans.
So, you train modern people to
become these types of healers
for their own bodies, right?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, the
way that the shaman
learns how to become a healer
is by healing themselves.
So you learn the techniques by
going through your own healing.
And the very first one is
you learn that your deepest
wounds are also your sources of
greatest power and compassion.
So as you heal from
these very deep wounds,
your compassion awakens.
You know what it is to
hurt, so you understand
somebody else's pain.
And so you go through
your own healing
by clearing the
imprints for disease
from your luminous energy field.
>>LISA: How do you do this?
>>VILLOLDO: And first let me
tell you what the imprints are.
The imprints are two types.
One of them are genetic so
that if heart disease runs
in the family it's
also in the field.
And the other are karmic that
we bring from former lifetimes.
And these are packets of
information in the field
that the shamans learn how
to clear out so you would not
have to replay the same
illnesses and the same family
dramas that your parents did.
>>LISA: And those shamans
are doing this-- of course
they're skilled in doing it,
but they're working specifically
on the luminous energy field.
>>VILLOLDO: They're
working on the field.
>>LISA: And they
are trained to be
able to see what the blocks are.
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah And
we train our students.
They are able to
perceive the field
after six months of training.
>>LISA: So you could look,
you, yourself, Alberto,
could look at someone right now
and see in my energy field what
needs to be repaired.
>>VILLOLDO: Yes, I could.
>>LISA: You could.
>>VILLOLDO: But I
need your permission.
>>LISA: Right.
And it feels like there would
be a ceremony or a session
around it that allows you to
be able to go into that state,
right?
>>VILLOLDO: Basically you
switch perceptual states.
And then you're not seeing
the obvious and the apparent,
but you're reading the
energy in the field.
And they have stories
that are attached to it
so that all of
your past, you hold
your past in the form of stories
that I can read in your field
and tell you, ah,
this happened to you,
or you remember this happening.
To me, not it really
happened to you,
but you believe that
it did because you
created a story around it.
And as you go
through your healing,
then you change the story
around whatever happened to you.
>>LISA: Our stories are
so powerful that they
can change our DNA.
>>VILLOLDO: Totally.
>>LISA: And so, as much as
they can change our DNA,
we can unchange them
by undoing the story.
>>VILLOLDO: In fact,
that's one of the keys.
You change the story,
you change your life,
you change your genetics.
>>LISA: Wow.
What was your story?
Why did you get into the
riddlement of the parasites?
Did you ever discover that?
>>VILLOLDO: Well,
I remember one time
we were in the Southwest
in Canyon de Chelly,
and there was an old
Navajo medicine woman.
And she said to me,
Alberto-- we had
become friends over the years.
And one day she said,
what's your story, Alberto?
Tell me about yourself.
I said, well, my father left
home when I was very young,
and I never had a really
positive role model of what
it was like to be a man.
And I've always been
looking for that.
She goes, hm.
And I asked, well,
what's your story?
Tell me about yourself.
And she says, the
Red Rock Canyon
walls am I. The
desert wind am I.
The child that not eat today at
the reservation am I. And I go,
wow.
How much better of a story than
little boy looking for daddy?
Any way, the end of
the story is that I
was catching an airplane the
following day to go back to LA.
And in an airplane, you don't
talk to the person next to you
until you're almost
ready to land.
And the man next to me says,
well, tell me, what do you do?
What's your story?
And I go, the Red Rock Canyon
walls am I. The desert wind.
And he goes, oh my god.
He changed seats.
And of course I wasn't
any of those things.
I was still a lost little boy.
And it wasn't until I healed
myself and I healed that story
that I could become
the desert wind
and I could identify with that
child that did not eat today.
But you cannot change your story
simply by writing up a better
one.
It has to be cellular.
It has to be in your field.
>>LISA: Well, you said you have
to get rid of the old emotions.
>>VILLOLDO: You got to
get rid of the emotion.
They're all wrapped in emotion.
>>LISA: And then
bring in the feelings.
>>VILLOLDO: Mm-hmm.
>>LISA: And so triggering
and the emotions
to any wrongness or story
that we're holding onto
can be replaced by a different
feeling around that event.
Right?
Is that what you're saying?
>>VILLOLDO: It simply
becomes a memory.
It happened to
someone, but it was not
you, because at that point,
that you that you thought
you were no longer exists.
>>LISA: OK, because my
authenticity meter went up
there, and that was
not truthful for me.
But what was the last
thing you just said?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, that you
that you thought you were,
that wounded little
boy looking for daddy,
was not really who
you really were.
You were much bigger than that,
but you had become attached.
I had become attached to that
story of the wounded boy.
>>LISA: I see.
So you replaced that with what?
>>VILLOLDO: With a better story.
>>LISA: Which is?
>>VILLOLDO: Well, the story of
my life has been the explorer.
And I've been an explorer
of consciousness.
And I started out in a
brain research laboratory
at San Francisco
State University
and ended up in the
rainforests of the world.
And many of the anthropologists
that I met at that time
were dead.
The jungle is very clean.
It's a very pristine
and clean place.
But you have to go through the
last outpost of the white man's
filth.
I mean, the white man
is the only individual
or people that
contaminate their nest
and that poison their own well.
So it was in those
malaria-infected regions,
mosquito-ridden regions
that I picked up
all of these parasites that took
me to meet my possible death.
>>LISA: That was your last hope.
>>VILLOLDO: Three
years ago, yeah.
And then I changed my story.
>>LISA: You said
three years ago?
>>VILLOLDO: Three
years ago, yeah.
>>LISA: That was it?
>>VILLOLDO: Yeah.
>>LISA: Oh my goodness.
Wow.
Well, there's so much more
to talk about with you.
And this is just going
to be a cliffhanger,
because we're going to
have to have a part two.
Alberto Villoldo is going to
join me for another interview
because there's still
so much more to cover.
And you are just a
wealth of information,
so I'd love it if you'd
stay for another hour.
>>VILLOLDO: Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
Well, if you would like to watch
a replay of this interview,
please do.
You can go to
gaiamtv.com and learn
so much from Dr. Villoldo.
And then we can continue on
for another interview as well.
Until then, I invite
you to stay inspired.
[MUSIC PLAYING]